★covid 19 symptoms



The COVID-19 pandemic has infected over 40 million people worldwide. Despite the high mortality seen among hospitalized patients, many have survived, although little is known about the medium-to-long term effects of COVID-19 disease after discharge. Although predominantly a respiratory illness, emerging data suggests that multi-organ injury is common, particularly in moderate to severe infections. A new study published on the preprint server medRxiv* in October 2020 describes the illness's sequelae in the months after recovery.

Multi-Organ Damage from COVID-19
COVID-19 is mostly a respiratory or pneumonic illness, but as data comes in from around the globe, it would seem that multiple organs are affected by the virus, the more so when the infection is severe or moderate. The most susceptible organs appear to be the brain, heart, gastrointestinal system, and kidneys.

This extensive injury mechanism could be virus-mediated dysregulation of the immune response, leading to exuberant inflammation, endothelial injury, coagulation abnormalities, and resulting damage. The outcomes depend on the extent of infection, inflammation, and individual pre-infection health status.

The link between abnormal inflammation and chronic COVID-19 sequelae is emerging. Some researchers have shown that convalescent patients show lung inflammation even months into recovery, which may be the case with other organs.

Systemic effects of COVID-19 and relationship with inflammatory response
Systemic effects of COVID-19 and relationship with inflammatory response. A, B: Comparison of cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) parameters (VO2 max and VE/VCO2) between comorbidity-matched control and COVID-19 survivors. C: Relationship between VE/VCO2 and white cell count in COVID-19. D, E: Comparison of susceptibility weighted T2* signal (left and right thalamus) and MoCA scores between control and COVID-19 survivors. F: Relationship between periventricular white matter hyperintensity volume (pWMH’s) volume and white cell count in COVID-19. G, H: Comparison of myocardial native T1 (base and mid ventricle) between control and COVID-19 survivors. I: Relationship between basal native T1 and C-reactive protein (CRP). J, K: Comparison of liver T1 and iron-corrected liver T1 between control and COVID-19 survivors. An in-house algorithm was used to calculate iron-corrected T1, so these values cannot be compared to the LiverMultiScan cT1. L: Relationship between iron-corrected liver T1 and CRP in COVID19. M, N: Comparison of average cortical kidney T1 and corticomedullary differentiation in control and COVID-19 survivors. O: Relationship between average cortical kidney T1 and CRP in COVID-19 (p-values for comparisons are from Student’s t-tests for all variables; Spearman’s correlation coefficient and p-values are reported for correlations, # signifies pvalues were derived from comparison of variables that were Gaussianised and deconfounded).
Understanding the Sequelae of COVID-19
The current study aims at understanding how exercise capacity, intellectual function, mental health, and the quality of life are affected by this disease. They assessed individuals who had survived a moderate-to-severe bout of COVID-19, discharged at 2-3 months from disease onset, persistent inflammation in multiple organs, and the effect in terms of actual health outcomes.

The study included 58 discharged COVID-19 patients and 30 controls with the same comorbidity profile. The prospective study looked for multi-organ inflammation and damage using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), walk test, and other assessment scales.

Persistent Symptoms and Signs of Organ Damage
They found that persistent breathlessness was present in two-thirds of patients, with fatigue in well over half the patients. Imaging revealed abnormalities in the lungs in 60% of patients, while one quarter to a half showed changes in the heart and kidneys, respectively. Only a tenth showed liver injury.

Physical fitness was markedly reduced as demonstrated by a reduced exercise tolerance and the distance walked within 6 minutes.

Other observable changes included abnormalities in various parts of the brain, while cognitive performance was impaired in both executive and visuospatial areas.  (10%) and kidneys (29%) of patients. The damage seen in multiple organs during convalescence correlated with inflammatory markers and with the severity of acute illness, thus offering the latter prognostic value.

Moderate to severe anxiety, and depression, were reported by over a third of patients, mostly because of their persistent shortness of breath while testing negative for the virus. Overall, they reported a significant fall in the quality of life they enjoyed, relative to controls. A large percentage of this impairment was due to loss of physical condition, continuing breathlessness, and tiredness, which prevented daily living activities from proceeding as normal.

Chronic Post-Viral Inflammation Holds the Key
Related Stories
Evaporation is critical for coronavirus transmission in colder months
Severe fatigue common in COVID-19, independent of disease severity
Why blood type O might lower risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection
The study draws attention to the medium-term concerning sequelae of COVID-19 in surviving patients. In a high proportion, the lungs and other organs show MRI evidence of abnormalities, perhaps due to ongoing chronic inflammation. The findings of abnormalities in the lung parenchyma in many patients on MRI agree with earlier studies, which reveal the presence of persistent inflammation in 71% of survivors even three months after discharge.

The earlier outbreaks of SARS were similarly followed by permanent lung damage and impaired lung function in many survivors, for months and years later. The diminished lung function in up to 13% of survivors has also been reported recently by other investigators.

The evidence is piling up that SARS-CoV-2 produces a high viral load and that ACE2 receptors and TMPRSS2 are found at high levels in the lungs, kidneys, heart, and brain. These are necessary for viral entry into the host cells and viral replication, indicating this virus's tropism for organs other than the lung.

Despite the presence of neurological symptoms in half the patients in this study, MRI failed to show severe injury to the brain in most cases. This could be due to microvascular injury as shown by the presence of calcification and the products of blood degradation. This might account for the tendency for these images to display increased white matter hyperintensities and the increased incidence of stroke among these patients.

Implications and Future Directions
The increased coagulability of blood and chronic inflammation of nervous tissue might well lead to brain damage secondary to vascular damage in these patients. This could be why they also experience cognitive decline in the executive realm, primarily reflecting executive function impairment. These findings should trigger future research on the link between cognitive impairment and COVID-19.

Up to a third of COVID-19 patients who require hospitalization have an acute myocardial injury, which predicts a higher risk of fatality. Cardiac MRI is useful in this situation. Earlier, this modality has demonstrated that up to 60% of patients have significant inflammation of the heart tissues during convalescence, and a third of this subgroup had to be admitted to hospital.

In the current study, only a quarter of patients showed the presence of cardiac inflammation, correlating with inflammatory serum markers. This may require further work on the comparability of different studies that use different reference ranges and methods and have different patient cohorts.

Liver injury in COVID-19 survivors could also be due to hyperinflammation, abnormalities of liver metabolism due to hypoxia, venous thrombosis, and the effects of the drugs used in the treatment of the infection. The cholangiocytes may also be susceptible to direct infection, as ACE2 receptors are present in these cells. Over a tenth of convalescent patients have persistently high liver biomarkers at 2-3 months, and 10% have fibroinflammatory markers, which is correlated with MRI findings to some extent.

Kidney damage seems to be due to renal inflammation that is both prolonged and accompanied by loss of corticomedullary differentiation. This pattern is not unique to COVID-19, being seen with other post-inflammatory injuries to the glomeruli.

The researchers conclude that the chronic inflammatory reaction is responsible for evidence of persistent injury to multiple organs, and this is due not to the occurrence of critical illness but to the immunopathology of the infection.

They conclude, "Further efforts to understand the role of specific immunopathological mechanisms underlying this inflammatory process, and strategies to arrest them, could be important in limiting the long-term detrimental effects of COVID-19 on vital organs."

About a third of patients discontinued their physiotherapy because of fatigue and myalgia, indicating the possible occurrence of muscle wasting. This is known to accompany severe illness, which induces a catabolic state. Thus, this could significantly contribute to the deconditioning effect observed in convalescents, along with the lung damage.

More studies will be necessary to understand how psychological injury is related to the systemic or neurological inflammation following COVID-19. However, it is clear that multidisciplinary care will be needed to help survivors regain a better quality of life and good health following their discharge.




As the Northern Hemisphere heads into winter, whether a fever and cough mean the flu or Covid-19 is a nerve-racking guessing game. There is, however, a silent killer that causes similar symptoms and could be lurking in your home.

Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless gas that's produced when a fossil fuel — coal, crude oil or natural gas — is burned by furnaces, portable heaters, vehicles, stoves, grills, gas ranges or fireplaces.
Breathing in too much of it can poison you, leading to symptoms including headache, upset stomach, dizziness, weakness, vomiting, chest pain and confusion, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — mimicking the symptoms of the flu or Covid-19.
Inhaling high concentrations can make you pass out or kill you, especially if you are sleeping, drunk or belong to a group that's at high-risk for serious illness and death from different diseases and exposures. Carbon monoxide can also poison your pets.
"Influenza and (Covid-19) hijack the cells, mostly in lungs, where they reproduce and that's where the main damage is often done" and where symptoms stem from, said Dr. Jeremy Brown, an emergency care physician and author of "Influenza: The Hundred-Year Hunt to Cure the Deadliest Disease in History."
Carbon monoxide, on the other hand, poisons people by hooking onto hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen from the lungs to the body.
7 ways to stay healthy (and sane) during the fall coronavirus surge
7 ways to stay healthy (and sane) during the fall coronavirus surge
"The carbon monoxide comes along and kicks the oxygen off the hemoglobin," Brown said. "What you start to have are signs of a lack of oxygen."
Over 20,000 Americans annually visit the emergency room for carbon monoxide exposure, over 4,000 are hospitalized and over 400 die. Since many are now at home almost 24/7, it's certainly possible that emergency doctors will "see more carbon monoxide exposure than usual" — especially if we have a harsh winter and rely more on heating, Brown said.
Inadvertent poisoning "can be stopped by practicing safe behaviors," said Scott A. Damon, health communication lead at the CDC's Asthma & Community Health Branch.
Read on to learn the common causes of exposure, how you can prevent it, how to know what's causing your symptoms and the potential treatments.
Preventing exposure and poisoning
Carbon monoxide exposure is the byproduct of incomplete combustion, Brown said — when the oil in appliances or vehicles is heated but doesn't burn completely. Blocked ventilation systems and running portable generators in confined spaces or on boats without proper ventilation can also lead to buildup.
Additionally, "these are the months when people may warm up a vehicle inside an attached garage, which is extremely dangerous" even with the garage open, Damon said. That's because the fumes can seep into your house.
5 things to know about carbon monoxide
5 things to know about carbon monoxide
The most important way to be able to tell whether symptoms are from carbon monoxide exposure is to install a carbon monoxide detector, Brown said. Since carbon monoxide sinks, having one in your basement is critical, but the potential for exposure on every floor means you should also have detectors installed in the main living areas and in or near bedrooms so you can be woken up by an alarm while sleeping.
Install and test battery-operated detectors and check and replace batteries twice a year when you change your clock, the CDC recommends. And consider buying a detector with a digital readout that also shows the level of concentration in the home.
"Check the manufacturer's instructions on when to replace the detector itself," Damon said.
Your smoke detector should indicate whether it can also detect carbon monoxide. Levels higher than one to 70 parts per million can cause symptoms.
What's the source of your symptoms?
If you or your family are experiencing even mild symptoms and carbon monoxide poisoning is possible, your best bet is to get everyone to a safe environment and get checked out by a medical professional, Brown said, especially if you belong to a high-risk group.
But could it be the flu? Having received an influenza shot doesn't guarantee that you don't have the flu since flu vaccines, even when they match the viruses circulating, reduce the risk of illness by 40% to 60%.
A process of elimination will allow emergency care doctors to figure out if you have Covid-19, the flu or carbon monoxide poisoning, Brown said.
Covid-19 symptoms: What we know now and what to do
Covid-19 symptoms: What we know now and what to do
"One of the ways in which carbon monoxide differs from (Covid-19) and from influenza is that if you step outside and get some fresh air, your symptoms will slowly dissipate" over the next several hours if your exposure was minimal, Brown said. If someone feels better outside but symptoms creep up at home, that could be a sign of poisoning.
If it's possible that you've been exposed in your home, a doctor can administer a blood test to measure your carbon monoxide level, Brown added.
Potential treatments
If a doctor suspects poisoning, Brown said, you'll receive an oxygen mask that would deliver about five times more oxygen to your body than is available in the atmosphere. The doctor would then keep an eye on you for up to several hours and check your carbon monoxide level until you can be discharged — "with the instructions not to return to the place where they were exposed and to make sure that no one else is in that place either," Brown said.
A qualified service technician should check your appliances before you reuse them.
People are buying pulse oximeters to try and detect coronavirus at home. Do you need one?
People are buying pulse oximeters to try and detect coronavirus at home. Do you need one?
For those with severe poisoning, symptoms can worsen into shortness of breath, comatose state or muscle rigidity, Brown said. That person would be admitted to the hospital for prolonged oxygen therapy.
Patients even worse off would be put in a dive chamber, a highly pressurized vessel or room where they would receive up to "about three times the amount of pressure that is on the surface as we walk around," Brown said. "That will force the oxygen into the tissues and displace the carbon monoxide poisoning."




Older people, women and those with a wide range of symptoms in the first week of their illness appear to be most likely to develop "long COVID," according to a preprint paper posted online by researchers at King's College London on Wednesday.

The paper defines "long COVID" as having symptoms persist for more than four weeks, while a short duration of COVID-19 was defined as less than 10 days, without a subsequent relapse.

About 1 in 20 people with Covid-19, or 4.5%, are likely to experience symptoms for eight weeks or more, the preprint analysis of data from the COVID Symptom Study app showed. The analysis has not been published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The data was collected from 4,182 users of the app in the U.K. who reported testing positive for coronavirus and regularly logged their health information in the app.

When it came to the sets of symptoms reported, the research identified two main groups of long COVID-19 sufferers. One group experienced mainly respiratory symptoms, such as a cough and shortness of breath, plus fatigue and headaches. The other group experienced "multi-system" symptoms in many parts of the body, such as heart palpitations, gut issues, pins and needles or numbness, and "brain fog."

"It's important we use the knowledge we have gained from the first wave in the pandemic to reduce the long-term impact of the second. This should pave the way for trials of early interventions to reduce the long term effects," said Dr. Claire Steves, clinical academic and senior author from King's College London, in a news release.

While most of the people with COVID-19 in the study reported being back to normal in 11 days or less, about 1 in 7 reported symptoms lasting for at least four weeks, about 1 in 20 for at least eight weeks and about 1 in 50 for at least 12 weeks.

Long COVID-19 sufferers were also twice as likely to report a relapse after they recovered compared with those who had "short COVID" (16% vs 8.4%).

About 1 in 5 adults older than 70, or 21.9%, who tested positive for coronavirus developed long COVID, compared with about 1 in 10 18- to 49-year-olds, the study found. Women were more likely to suffer from long COVID than men -- at 14.9% of women compared to 9.5% of men -- but only in the younger age group.

People who developed long COVID also had a slightly higher average BMI than those with short COVID, according to the paper. The researchers also found that people with asthma were more likely to develop long COVID, but found no clear links to any other underlying health conditions.

The analysis has several limitations, including that it is based on self-reported information, was conducted online via an app, and the app users were disproportionately female and younger than 70.

The researchers used the information to develop a model to predict who is most at risk of long COVID based on their age, sex, and count of early symptoms. Statistical tests showed that this simple prediction was able to detect more than two thirds (69%) of people who went on to get long COVID (sensitivity), and 73% effective at avoiding false alarms (specificity).

The team then tested this model against an independent dataset of 2,472 people who reported a positive coronavirus antibody test result with a range of symptoms and found that it gave similar predictions of risk.


COVID-19 patients experience symptoms in two to three months after contracting the virus, according to a new study by Oxford University on Monday.

The study found that a high percentage of patients discharged from hospitals were still experiencing some symptoms, such as shortness of breath, fatigue, anxiety, and depression, months after they were infected with the novel coronavirus.

Scientists also believe that persistent or chronic inflammation may be an underlying factor for the abnormalities in multiple organs among COVID-19 survivors, a written statement by the university said.

A total of 58 novel coronavirus patients, who had been admitted to hospitals in March-May, participated in the study.

Some 64% of the patients experienced persistent breathlessness and 55% complained of significant fatigue two or three months after contracting the virus, the study suggested.

Tissue signal abnormalities were observed in the lungs of 60% of the patients, in the kidneys of 29%, in the hearts of 26%, and the livers of 10% of the patients.

Tissue changes in parts of the brain were also detected under magnetic resonance imaging, with patients demonstrating impaired cognitive performance.

Patients also showed symptoms of anxiety and depression, the study found.

“These findings underscore the need to further explore the physiological processes associated with COVID-19 and to develop a holistic, integrated model of clinical care for our patients after they have been discharged from hospital,” Dr. Betty Raman, who is leading the study, said.




In pre-pandemic times, suddenly running to the bathroom due to diarrhea or vomiting would be a tip-off that you might have food poisoning or the stomach flu. But given that COVID-19 can present with various stomach-related symptoms, it might be trickier to understand what you’re dealing with—and what you’re supposed to do next.

It’s important to remember that a stomach flu isn’t the same as influenza, which is responsible for the typical “flu” as you know it—fever, achy muscles, sore throat, and generally feeling crummy. Instead, it’s a term usually used for gastroenteritis, a condition that is characterized by inflammation of the stomach or intestines, per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

There are various causes behind a stomach flu, but one of the most common is norovirus, which can make a person incredibly ill between 12 and 48 hours after being exposed, the CDC says. In the U.S., norovirus causes up to 21 million cases of viral gastroenteritis every year.

While they can cause similar symptoms, norovirus and the novel coronavirus responsible for COVID-19 often spread differently. For example, you can develop norovirus after coming into contact with particles from an infected person’s poop or vomit, breathing in vomit aerosols, or eating contaminated food or water. Most people develop COVID-19 by inhaling respiratory droplets from an infected person they had close contact with.

So how can you differentiate a case of the coronavirus from the stomach flu? The symptoms can overlap, but they also have some differences. Here’s what doctors want you to know.

What are the symptoms of the stomach flu?
The symptoms can vary slightly, depending on what causes your stomach flu. In general, the CDC says you may experience the following symptoms, and start to feeling better within one to three days:

Diarrhea
Vomiting
Nausea
Stomach pain
Fever
Headache
Body aches
What are the symptoms of COVID-19?
The following are the major symptoms of COVID-19, according to the CDC, which “does not include all possible symptoms.” Many people who contract the novel coronavirus tend to feel ill for about two weeks.